For the product you described, I would not buy a dozen APIs yet. You can build a strong MVP with 3 core data/model sources, then add premium legal databases later.

Start with these
API	What it does for you	Get now?
OpenAI API	Reads the user's fact pattern, identifies issues, analyzes cases/documents, generates annotations, structured output	Yes
CourtListener API	Searches U.S. case law, opinions, citations, federal docket/PACER-derived RECAP material	Yes
GovInfo API	Federal statutes, CFR, Federal Register and other official federal government material	Yes
Congress.gov API	Bills, laws, legislative history, committee material, CRS reports, etc.	Later
State-specific sources	State statutes, regulations and state-court material that isn't adequately covered elsewhere	Depending on scope
1. OpenAI API — the reasoning/analysis layer

This should be the "brain" of the system. The current Responses API supports custom tool/function calls, file inputs and file search, which fits this architecture well.

The model shouldn't itself be your legal database. Instead, give it functions such as:

search_cases()
get_case()
search_statutes()
get_statute()
search_user_documents()
get_document_passage()

Then a request like:

"My landlord kept my security deposit
and never sent me an itemized list."

might cause the model to determine:

Jurisdiction: Pennsylvania

Potential issues:
- security deposit retention
- itemized damages requirement
- statutory deadline

Need research:
→ Pennsylvania statutes
→ Pennsylvania appellate precedent
→ potentially federal cases applying PA law

Your backend then executes the searches and feeds the actual sources back to the model.

Create an OpenAI API key

2. CourtListener — probably your most important legal API

CourtListener / Free Law Project API documentation

CourtListener provides APIs for case law, legal search, PACER/RECAP material, judges, and related court data.

For your application, you'd use it for searches like:

search_cases(
    query="security deposit itemized damages",
    jurisdiction="pa",
    court="pa-super-ct"
)

and get actual opinions back.

Then your AI can extract:

CASE

Smith v. Example

Court:
Pennsylvania Superior Court

Relevant passage:
"..."

Holding:
...

Why relevant:
The court interpreted the notice requirement
that may apply to the user's situation.

User fact connected to case:
"No itemized list was received."

CourtListener is particularly attractive for an MVP because Free Law Project has explicitly designed its API for legal research applications.

3. GovInfo — authoritative federal primary material

GovInfo Developer Hub

GovInfo gives you programmatic access to official federal government material and metadata. It supports content such as the CFR and other federal collections, and uses a free api.data.gov key.

This gives you an important separation:

CourtListener
      ↓
CASE LAW

GovInfo
      ↓
FEDERAL STATUTES / REGULATIONS / OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS

OpenAI
      ↓
UNDERSTANDS + CONNECTS EVERYTHING

Get a free api.data.gov key for this.

4. Congress.gov — useful, but don't prioritize it

Congress.gov API

It currently exposes bills, laws, amendments, committees, Congressional Record material, CRS reports, hearings and other legislative information.

That's valuable if your AI eventually needs to research legislative history or pending legislation.

But that's not necessary to prove your initial concept.

I'd postpone it.

The bigger problem: state law

This is where your project gets harder.

There isn't one magical free API containing perfectly structured:

All 50 state statutes
All 50 state regulations
All state court opinions
Federal opinions
Citation histories
Case treatment
Good-law status

CourtListener helps substantially with opinions, but your statutory/regulatory sources will require additional work.

So I strongly recommend making your first version jurisdiction-limited.

For example:

Paralegal AI v0.1

Supported:

Pennsylvania law
+
Federal law

That lets you make the retrieval system extremely reliable before trying to support the entire United States.

Don't buy Westlaw/Lexis-type access yet

Eventually, commercial legal-data licensing could become one of the biggest expenses and business considerations.

Features such as comprehensive citator treatment are extremely valuable:

Case A
   ↓
followed by Case B
   ↓
distinguished by Case C
   ↓
criticized by Case D
   ↓
overruled by Case E

For an MVP, though, you can build your own limited citation graph from available case data rather than trying to reproduce a commercial citator.

Just don't represent your result as equivalent to Shepard's or KeyCite unless you actually have sufficient data to support that claim.

What I'd get today

You only need three things to start:

1. OpenAI API key

OpenAI API platform

2. CourtListener account/API access

CourtListener API documentation

3. api.data.gov key for GovInfo

GovInfo API

Those are enough for us to build something like:

                     USER
                       │
                       ▼
              "Describe your case"
                       │
                       ▼
                 OPENAI API
                       │
              identify legal issues
                       │
             ┌─────────┴─────────┐
             ▼                   ▼
       COURTLISTENER          GOVINFO
             │                   │
          Cases             Statutes /
          Opinions          Regulations
             │                   │
             └─────────┬─────────┘
                       ▼
                  OPENAI API
                       │
               Analyze sources
                       │
                       ▼
              Evidence / Law Map
                       
        ┌────────────────────────────┐
        │ Relevant Fact              │
        │ "No itemized list"         │
        │             ↓              │
        │ Statute § XYZ              │
        │             ↓              │
        │ Case interpreting § XYZ    │
        │             ↓              │
        │ Relevant passage           │
        │             ↓              │
        │ Explanation                │
        │             ↓              │
        │ SOURCE LINK                │
        └────────────────────────────┘

That's enough to build version 0.1. I wouldn't spend money on another legal-data API until you've gotten this pipeline working end-to-end.

give me only free ones and the OPENAI APIs as possible contenders

If the rule is free APIs/data sources + OpenAI APIs only, I’d narrow the contenders to these:

API	Cost	What it gives your paralegal AI	Priority
CourtListener API v4	Free access available, subject to account/rate/access terms	U.S. case law, opinions, case search, citations, RECAP/PACER-derived data	⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐
GovInfo API	Free	U.S. Code, CFR, Federal Register, congressional/federal government documents	⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐
Open States API	Free API access available	State legislation and legislative information	⭐⭐⭐
OpenAI API	Paid usage	Legal-text analysis, query generation, issue spotting, document annotation, synthesis	⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

One correction to my previous answer: CourtListener's access model changed in 2026. Free Law Project now describes its APIs as available through memberships/commercial arrangements, with no-cost EDU access for students/academic researchers and some APIs open for experimentation. So I would use it for your student/MVP prototype, but I would not assume unlimited free commercial API access when you eventually launch.

The stack I'd use for your prototype
                    USER'S CASE
                         │
                         ▼
                   OpenAI API
                  issue spotting
                         │
           ┌─────────────┼─────────────┐
           ▼             ▼             ▼
    CourtListener     GovInfo      Open States
           │             │             │
       CASE LAW       FEDERAL         STATE
       PRECEDENT        LAW        LEGISLATION
           │             │             │
           └─────────────┼─────────────┘
                         ▼
                    OpenAI API
                         │
              rank relevant material
              extract relevant text
              compare facts to cases
              identify conflicting law
              generate annotations
                         │
                         ▼
                 PARALEGAL REPORT

CourtListener is especially useful because its v4 API doesn't just provide opinions. It has a legal search API and citation APIs, including citation verification and relationships between citing/cited opinions. That's extremely useful for reducing fake-case hallucinations.

GovInfo is genuinely free: you request a free api.data.gov key. It provides machine-readable government documents and metadata, and its newer search service lets you query collections programmatically.

Open States is useful for state legislative information, but don't mistake it for a complete database of every state's current codified statutes and regulations. Its API is primarily oriented around state legislative data.

On the OpenAI side

You don't need several separate OpenAI products. I'd build around the Responses API and give the model tools that your backend implements:

search_cases()
get_case()
verify_citation()

search_federal_law()
get_federal_document()

search_state_legislation()

search_uploaded_documents()
get_document_section()

Then use Embeddings only if/when you build your own searchable document database.

So your OpenAI contenders are essentially:

Responses API → definitely
Embeddings API → probably later
File Search → potentially useful for uploaded client/case documents

The OpenAI model handles reasoning and orchestration; CourtListener/GovInfo/Open States remain the sources of legal authority.

I'd start with exactly these four

1. OpenAI API — intelligence/orchestration
2. CourtListener v4 — cases + precedent + citations
3. GovInfo — federal law/documents
4. Open States — state legislative data

Don't add anything else yet. The major remaining gap is comprehensive current state statutes/regulations. That's the part I'd solve next rather than piling on more APIs.

PARALEGAL PROJECT — CONVERSATION DOCUMENTATION
Dates: September 18–19, 2026
Participants: Project owner and Codex (AI coding assistant)

This is a chronological project log, not a verbatim transcript. User requests
are quoted or summarized, and assistant responses and implementation work are
summarized. API key values, editor selections containing secrets, and private
credentials are intentionally omitted.

The final request referred to "promptlof3.txt"; this documentation uses the
existing HW3 file open in the editor, readMe/HW3/promptlog3.txt.

1. KEEPING API KEYS OUT OF GIT

User request:
"Firstly, I am going to give you my OpenAI API key, i want you to create a .env
or ignore file to securely hide the API key"

Assistant response and work:
Inspected the repository and created a local .env with an empty
OPENAI_API_KEY entry. Added .gitignore rules for .env and related local
environment files. Explained that the key should be entered locally rather
than sent in chat or placed in browser JavaScript. Clarified that ignoring a
file prevents accidental commits but does not encrypt it.

2. STORING MULTIPLE KEYS

User request:
"can i put multipe API keys in that file?"

Assistant response:
Explained that each key can occupy its own line, using a distinct environment
variable name. The backend must read the corresponding variable. The entire
.env file remains excluded from Git.

3. DEFINING THE PARALEGAL APP

User request, summarized:
Use four API keys to build a website that accepts a legal prompt and context,
then returns annotated court documents, summaries, related precedent, and
laws relevant to the submitted location. Pro bono research was given as an
example use case.

Assistant response and work:
Inspected the existing static website and the empty Paralegal.html file.
Checked environment variable names without printing their values. Explained
that API calls need a backend so secret keys are not exposed in the browser.
Consulted official API documentation while preparing the implementation.

4. IDENTIFYING THE FOUR SERVICES

Assistant clarification:
Asked which services the other three keys belonged to because the saved .env
initially contained only a blank OpenAI entry.

User clarification:
- CourtListener: court cases, opinions, precedent, and citations.
- GovInfo: federal statutes, regulations, and government documents.
- Open States: state legislation and legislative data.

Implementation decision:
Use OpenAI for query planning, supplemental web research, and summaries;
CourtListener for opinions; GovInfo for federal materials; and Open States
for state bill records. Clearly distinguish proposed bills from current law
and pro bono representation from the underlying legal claim.

5. BUILDING THE INITIAL RESEARCH WORKSPACE

Assistant work:
Created the HTML interface, responsive CSS, JavaScript behavior, and a Python
backend. The form accepts a claim or question, state, city/county/court,
additional context, and a request for pro bono or legal-aid resources.

The research packet includes source-linked summaries, relevance explanations,
jurisdiction notes, supporting or adverse authority, missing facts, cautions,
and next steps. It provides source filters, expandable retrieved text, JSON
download, and printing or saving to PDF.

Annotations are retained only when the quoted passage exactly matches the
retrieved source text. This verifies that words occur in the retrieved text;
it does not prove the interpretation is correct or the authority is current.
Web-search notes are not treated as original-document quotations. Missing
documents and failed providers are disclosed instead of hidden.

The interface annotates retrieved text and links to originals; it does not
rewrite the original court PDFs. The app is a research aid requiring review,
not a substitute for a qualified attorney or a legal citator.

6. INITIAL VALIDATION

Assistant work:
Ran 22 backend tests, later increased to 23 after improving recovery when
OpenAI synthesis fails. Checks included API adapter behavior with mocked
responses, exact quotation matching, rejection of unknown source references,
request validation, secret-file access protection, and partial failures.

Used headless Chrome to check desktop/mobile layout, examples, submission,
error handling, source filters, annotations, safe rendering, citations, JSON
export, printing, and empty results. Those browser checks passed without
JavaScript errors. These checks used synthetic evidence, not live legal
research results.

7. QUESTIONS ABOUT THE API SETUP

User request:
"is there something I need to do to fix the API problem?"

Assistant response:
Explained that the problem observed at that point was missing saved
configuration, not a confirmed provider outage or billing failure. Asked the
user to save real values in .env, not the blank .env.example template, and
run the app through its local Python server.

8. QUESTIONS ABOUT API CREDITS

User request:
"explain to me what I need to do to fix the APi credits"

Assistant response:
Consulted OpenAI billing documentation. Explained that ChatGPT subscriptions
and API billing are separate. Described checking the API billing account,
adding credits if needed, reviewing automatic reload settings, and allowing
time for a balance update. Clarified that missing credentials, exhausted
credits, and rate/spending limits are different problems; buying credits
does not solve every API error.

9. FIRST REQUEST TO CHECK OPENAI

User request:
"check openAI API now"

Assistant work and result:
Checked local configuration without displaying secret values. The app still
found no saved OpenAI key, so no authenticated API test could be completed.

10. CLARIFYING THE PLACEHOLDER CONFUSION

User request, summarized:
The OpenAI website says the key is not a placeholder; why does the assistant
think it is?

Assistant response:
Apologized for confusing wording. Explained that the app had found an empty
saved variable, not that the key displayed on OpenAI's website was fake or
invalid. The example text "your_actual_key" was only an instruction to insert
the actual value locally. Unsaved editor changes were a possible cause.

11. FIRST SUCCESSFUL LIVE OPENAI TEST

User request:
"I did all of that, try again i guess"

Assistant work and result:
The saved key was now detected. A minimal live request to OpenAI returned
HTTP 200 and a completed response. This verified access for that request,
not the user's account balance or every provider integration.

Security event:
The IDE included a selected API key in the conversation context. The assistant
did not repeat it and advised revoking it and creating a replacement. The
credential itself is not included anywhere in this documentation.

12. REPLACING THE EXPOSED KEY

User request:
"what should i do?"

Assistant response:
Explained how to revoke the exposed key, create a new one, replace the value
in .env, save it, and refresh configuration. Recommended closing the .env tab
or switching to another file before messaging so editor selections would not
include secret text again.

13. INVALIDATED KEY, THEN SUCCESSFUL RETEST

User requests:
"I put a new key in"
"try again"

Assistant work and results:
The first retest detected a saved key but received HTTP 401 with the code
token_invalidated. Explained that the saved key had been invalidated and
needed replacement. After the next user update, a minimal live request
returned HTTP 200 and completed successfully.

14. REMOVING UNNECESSARY DEVELOPMENT FILES

User request:
"Delete all files you added that are unecessary, then I will run the
paralegal.html and see if it works"

Assistant work:
Removed temporary browser screenshots, synthetic exported packets, browser
test scripts, the temporary virtual environment, and the initial automated
test file. Kept the app, backend, run guide, .env, and .gitignore. Updated
the run guide to remove references to deleted test files.

Explained that opening a static HTML file alone cannot run Python or safely
use server-side credentials.

15. MAKING THE APP WORK AS A WEBSITE

User request:
"looks good, make it so that the html file works,. and this functions as a
proper website"

Assistant clarification:
Asked whether the frontend should remain on GitHub Pages with a separately
hosted backend, or whether the entire app should be hosted together.

User response:
"I don't understyand the difference"

Assistant explanation and decision:
Explained that GitHub Pages serves static pages but cannot run the Python
API backend. Hosting both together provides one website address and avoids
connecting two separate hosting services. Prepared that simpler option,
while retaining support for a separately hosted frontend.

16. WEBSITE AND LAUNCHER CHANGES

Assistant work:
- Added Start Paralegal.cmd to start the backend and open the browser.
- Made direct opening of Paralegal.html discover the local service and
  navigate to the working local website. If the service is stopped, the page
  explains how to start it and checks again automatically.
- Added a connection dialog accessible on mobile as well as desktop.
- Added paralegal_host.py for HTTP hosting, access checks, and background
  research jobs with browser polling.
- Added production hosting configuration in render.yaml and requirements.txt.
- Required a separate website access code for hosted paid research, keeping
  provider API keys exclusively on the server.
- Documented local use and publishing steps in PARALEGAL_README.md.

Configuration correction:
Found that the user's Open States key used OPENSTATE_API_KEY. Added it as an
accepted alias alongside OPENSTATES_API_KEY and OPEN_STATES_API_KEY. No secret
value needed to be changed or exposed.

17. FIXING RUN WITHOUT DEBUGGING

User request:
"as a website it fails, i hit run without debugging and it opens a tab to an
error on chrome"

Assistant investigation:
Found that .vscode/launch.json opened http://localhost:8080, while Paralegal
used port 8000. The configuration also did not start the backend.

Assistant work:
Changed the launch configuration to "Paralegal website" with the correct URL,
http://localhost:8000/Paralegal.html. Added a pre-launch task in
.vscode/tasks.json to start Python and wait for the server's readiness
message before launching Chrome. Added server reuse support to avoid
starting a duplicate instance.

Also found older server processes still running. Stopped the identified old
Paralegal processes, started the corrected version, and added exclusive port
binding on Windows to prevent multiple local servers from sharing the port.

18. FINAL WEBSITE CHECKS

Assistant verification:
Ran 16 hosting tests covering secret-file routes, hostname/origin checks,
local-file discovery, hosted access-code protection, cross-origin preflight,
asynchronous jobs, concurrency, failed jobs, input validation, expiration,
the Open States alias, and the Waitress server.

Browser checks confirmed direct HTML opening reached the local website,
background research worked with synthetic responses, mobile controls worked,
incorrect access codes were rejected, API keys were rejected in the website
access-code field, and no horizontal overflow or JavaScript errors occurred.
Testing tools were placed outside the project rather than restoring the
previous test environment inside the repository.

The running page returned HTTP 200 and identified itself as
paralegal-research-v2. All four provider keys were detected as configured.
Detection confirms saved values are present; it does not establish that all
four accounts successfully completed live research. OpenAI had separately
passed the minimal live tests described above.

19. PROJECT STATUS AT THE TIME OF THIS LOG

The local website and VS Code launch flow were working. The user can select
"Paralegal website" in Run and Debug and press Ctrl+F5, use the Windows
launcher, or open the local URL when the backend is running.

Public hosting files and instructions were prepared, but no public deployment
was completed in this conversation. A hosting account, server environment
variables, and deployment are still required for a public website address.

Main project files:
Paralegal.html — page structure and forms.
paralegal.css — responsive appearance.
paralegal.js — connection, research submission/polling, and result rendering.
paralegal_server.py — research logic and provider integrations.
paralegal_host.py — local and hosted HTTP service.
Start Paralegal.cmd — Windows launcher.
requirements.txt and render.yaml — production hosting setup.
.vscode/launch.json and .vscode/tasks.json — VS Code launch workflow.
PARALEGAL_README.md — setup, use, hosting, and limitations.
.env — local secrets, deliberately excluded from this log and Git.
.gitignore — secret and development-file exclusions.

20. DOCUMENTING THE CONVERSATION

User request:
"Upload a documentation of our conversation for this project (paralegal
project) into promptlof3.txt"

Assistant work:
Created this chronological documentation in the existing, previously empty
readMe/HW3/promptlog3.txt file. Preserved the distinction between completed
work, mocked checks, live API checks, and hosting that remains to be done.
Excluded all credential values and sensitive IDE selections.
